---
course: Coding and Cryptography
course_year: II
question_number: 30
tags:
- II
- '2010'
- Coding and Cryptography
title: 'Paper 2, Section II, H '
year: 2010
---



The Van der Monde matrix $V\left(x_{0}, x_{1}, \ldots, x_{r-1}\right)$ is the $r \times r$ matrix with $(i, j)$ th entry $x_{i-1}^{j-1}$. Find an expression for $\operatorname{det} V\left(x_{0}, x_{1}, \ldots, x_{r-1}\right)$ as a product. Explain why this expression holds if we work modulo $p$ a prime.

Show that $\operatorname{det} V\left(x_{0}, x_{1}, \ldots, x_{r-1}\right) \equiv 0$ modulo $p$ if $r>p$, and that there exist $x_{0}, \ldots, x_{p-1}$ such that $\operatorname{det} V\left(x_{0}, x_{1}, \ldots, x_{p-1}\right) \not \equiv 0$. By using Wilson's theorem, or otherwise, find the possible values of $\operatorname{det} V\left(x_{0}, x_{1}, \ldots, x_{p-1}\right)$ modulo $p$.

The Dark Lord Y'Trinti has acquired the services of the dwarf Trigon who can engrave pairs of very large integers on very small rings. The Dark Lord wishes Trigon to engrave $n$ rings in such a way that anyone who acquires $r$ of the rings and knows the Prime Perilous $p$ can deduce the Integer $N$ of Power, but owning $r-1$ rings will give no information whatsoever. The integers $N$ and $p$ are very large and $p>N$. Advise the Dark Lord.

For reasons to be explained in the prequel, Trigon engraves an $(n+1)$ st ring with random integers. A band of heroes (who know the Prime Perilous and all the information contained in this question) set out to recover the rings. What, if anything, can they say, with very high probability, about the Integer of Power if they have $r$ rings (possibly including the fake)? What can they say if they have $r+1$ rings? What if they have $r+2$ rings?