---
course: Optimization
course_year: IB
question_number: 61
tags:
- IB
- '2012'
- Optimization
title: 'Paper 2, Section I, H '
year: 2012
---



Consider the two-player zero-sum game with payoff matrix

$$A=\left(\begin{array}{rrr}
2 & 0 & -2 \\
3 & 4 & 5 \\
6 & 0 & 6
\end{array}\right)$$

Express the problem of finding the column player's optimal strategy as a linear programming problem in which $x_{1}+x_{2}+x_{3}$ is to be maximized subject to some constraints.

Solve this problem using the simplex algorithm and find the optimal strategy for the column player.

Find also, from the final tableau you obtain, both the value of the game and the row player's optimal strategy. Paper 4, Section II

20H Optimization

Describe the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm.

State conditions under which the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate in a finite number of steps. Explain why it does so, and show that it finds a maximum flow. [You may assume that the value of a flow never exceeds the value of any cut.]

In a football league of $n$ teams the season is partly finished. Team $i$ has already won $w_{i}$ matches. Teams $i$ and $j$ are to meet in $m_{i j}$ further matches. Thus the total number of remaining matches is $M=\sum_{i<j} m_{i j}$. Assume there will be no drawn matches. We wish to determine whether it is possible for the outcomes of the remaining matches to occur in such a way that at the end of the season the numbers of wins by the teams are $\left(x_{1}, \ldots, x_{n}\right)$.

Invent a network flow problem in which the maximum flow from source to sink equals $M$ if and only if $\left(x_{1}, \ldots, x_{n}\right)$ is a feasible vector of final wins.

Illustrate your idea by answering the question of whether or not $x=(7,5,6,6)$ is a possible profile of total end-of-season wins when $n=4, w=(1,2,3,4)$, and $M=14$ with

$$\left(m_{i j}\right)=\left(\begin{array}{cccc}
- & 2 & 2 & 2 \\
2 & - & 1 & 1 \\
2 & 1 & - & 6 \\
2 & 1 & 6 & -
\end{array}\right)$$

Paper 3, Section II

21H Optimization

For given positive real numbers $\left(c_{i j}: i, j \in\{1,2,3\}\right)$, consider the linear program

$$P: \operatorname{minimize} \sum_{i=1}^{3} \sum_{j=1}^{3} c_{i j} x_{i j},$$

subject to $\sum_{i=1}^{3} x_{i j} \leqslant 1$ for all $j, \quad \sum_{j=1}^{3} x_{i j} \geqslant 1$ for all $i$,

and $x_{i j} \geqslant 0$ for all $i, j$.

(i) Consider the feasible solution $x$ in which $x_{11}=x_{12}=x_{22}=x_{23}=x_{31}=x_{33}=1 / 2$ and $x_{i j}=0$ otherwise. Write down two basic feasible solutions of $P$, one of which you can be sure is at least as good as $x$. Are either of these basic feasible solutions of $P$ degenerate?

(ii) Starting from a general definition of a Lagrangian dual problem show that the dual of $P$ can be written as

$$D: \operatorname{maximize}_{\lambda_{i} \geqslant 0, \mu_{i} \geqslant 0} \sum_{i=1}^{3}\left(\lambda_{i}-\mu_{i}\right) \quad \text { subject to } \lambda_{i}-\mu_{j} \leqslant c_{i j} \text { for all } i, j .$$

What happens to the optimal value of this problem if the constraints $\lambda_{i} \geqslant 0$ and $\mu_{i} \geqslant 0$ are removed?

Prove that $x_{11}=x_{22}=x_{33}=1$ is an optimal solution to $P$ if and only if there exist $\lambda_{1}, \lambda_{2}, \lambda_{3}$ such that

$$\lambda_{i}-\lambda_{j} \leqslant c_{i j}-c_{j j}, \quad \text { for all } i, j$$

[You may use any facts that you know from the general theory of linear programming provided that you state them.]