---
course: Principles of Statistics
course_year: II
question_number: 64
tags:
- II
- '2001'
- Principles of Statistics
title: 'A1.12 B1.15 '
year: 2001
---


(i) What are the main approaches by which prior distributions are specified in Bayesian inference?

Define the risk function of a decision rule $d$. Given a prior distribution, define what is meant by a Bayes decision rule and explain how this is obtained from the posterior distribution.

(ii) Dashing late into King's Cross, I discover that Harry must have already boarded the Hogwarts Express. I must therefore make my own way onto platform nine and threequarters. Unusually, there are two guards on duty, and I will ask one of them for directions. It is safe to assume that one guard is a Wizard, who will certainly be able to direct me, and the other a Muggle, who will certainly not. But which is which? Before choosing one of them to ask for directions to platform nine and three-quarters, I have just enough time to ask one of them "Are you a Wizard?", and on the basis of their answer I must make my choice of which guard to ask for directions. I know that a Wizard will answer this question truthfully, but that a Muggle will, with probability $\frac{1}{3}$, answer it untruthfully.

Failure to catch the Hogwarts Express results in a loss which I measure as 1000 galleons, there being no loss associated with catching up with Harry on the train.

Write down an exhaustive set of non-randomised decision rules for my problem and, by drawing the associated risk set, determine my minimax decision rule.

My prior probability is $\frac{2}{3}$ that the guard I ask "Are you a Wizard?" is indeed a Wizard. What is my Bayes decision rule?